# Black Metal

## Paint the Devil on the Wall

_February 12th, 2007_

Some elements of Xasthur’s sonic world will be familiar to anyone who’s ever plugged an electric guitar directly into the line-in socket of a PC: the aural murk and imbalance of 2006’s _Subliminal Genocide_ are as much artifacts of the recording technology as they are a reflection of the dreary hatefulness of creator Malefic’s inner world. The compositional structure &mdash; layered blocks of sound, starting abruptly, looping interminably, then fading or cutting out &mdash; similarly has a lot to do with the way "projects" are laid out in tools such as Cubase (been there, done that). This is unmistakeably the sound of bedroom metal, a genre I’m minded to nickname Doomgazer for its grimly dedicated introversion.

I can’t go along with attempts to christen this stuff "metal’s own Burial" &mdash; it’s too saturated and airless for that. Black metal is relentlessly entropic, committed to a one-way temporality in which intensities run inexorably down to zero and stay there, forever; there are no ghosts in this house, only cupboards full of corpses. The state of mind suggested by _Subliminal Genocide_ is one of trancelike contemplation of the ashes of the cosmos &mdash; the logical end-point of Xasthur’s misanthropic individualism.

If there is anything "out of joint" here it is space (relations of pitch) rather than time (rhythmic patterning). The wide chorus effect used on the guitars during some of the album’s quieter moments makes them sound curdlingly out-of-tune with themselves, while the frequent harmonic shifts between distantly-related minor chords suggest a tonal universe in which there is no progression, only substitution &mdash; a universe of perpetual suspension, in which resolution can never arrive (and would have no meaning if it did). It is in perhaps this spirit that Xasthur’s frosty logo evokes the endless winter desired by Narnia’s Ice Queen, the "cold world" of dejection.

Black metal’s associations with genocidal racism are neither accidental nor altogether straightforward. While some practitioners claim that the entire human race is despicable, pathetic and generally unworthy of survival, others take the "Nietzschean" view that only 99% or so are wholly beneath contempt; in this context the racists are &mdash; so to speak &mdash; moderates, rightly derided by the serious for their sentimental belief in the general viability of "Aryan" human stock. All the same, the most generously all-encompassing loathing of humanity will tend to find itself detained from time to time by specific objects of contempt. Racism provides a crude first-cut matrix of discrimination, but the hierarchy narrows to a point and then winks out: there’s no-one at the top of the pile.

This is what unites the racism of Celine, Lovecraft and Houellebecq with that of Varg Vikernes, the notorious singer of Burzum. It goes without saying that his pronouncements on "Jews" and "the negroid races" are cretinous, but it is not as the particular depraved fascist dipshit that he happens to be that Vikernes interests us. The belief that the specific worthlessness of human beings is rooted in their biological essence, which is everywhere corrupted and unworthy, may motivate some to seek redemption in programmes of racial purification, the "cleansing" through mass-death of a still-perfectible humanity; but as "race" is itself a nebulous concept sustained through appeals to mythological authenticity, such a project can find no halting-point. Vikernes may yet believe that blood-purity will be the salvation of his mythical Nordic races, but one imagines that the results of a DNA test of his own "racial" substance might well prove a disappointment to him.

Xasthur’s music seems mercifully free of such stupidities; indeed, Malefic’s claim that his singing addresses &mdash; albeit perhaps in order to intensify &mdash; the feelings of shame and worthlessness unwittingly entertained by his own listeners shows that he is uninterested in providing a sound-track for the depredations of some putative master-race.

Insofar as Xasthur’s music is at all "Nietzschean", it is so because of its obsession with the "death of God"; but its god-less universe is structurally identical to the "one God universe" derided by Burroughs. The place of God is empty, but not closed; the cosmos whirls to extinction around an evacuated throne. As with Lovecraft’s mythos, Xasthur’s aural chaosphere is oriented towards the confabulation/disclosure of an existential horror, a point of utter abandonment where all meanings derived from the obsolete value-system of judeo-christo-humanist narcissism collapse. But "God" has been "dead" for some time now; there is something almost nostalgic about the way Black metal hoists its dead flag to the top of that particular pole.

Perhaps this is where any "hauntological" valence in Xasthur might be located: the reapparition, out of its proper time, of such an abyssal mourning for God (albeit in the guise of contempt and loathing), such a profound faith in the potency of the concept of a loving and generous Creator (in whose absence all must surely be waste and horror). In the titles and lyrics of Black metal songs you will find references to religious symbols, concepts and items of liturgical paraphernalia almost entirely forgotten by the wider culture: does not such studious blasphemy betray a perverse attachment to its object?

## Generic Misanthropy (i)

_(February 18th, 2007)_

Is a consistent and thorough-going hatred of _all_ humanity possible? Indifference towards humanity is not difficult to imagine: pretty much all of the universe is full of it pretty much all of the time. But hatred of humanity as such, of "the human precisely as human", is much more difficult to carry off.

Hatred is "a human emotion"; this means both that it is a general propensity of human beings and that it manifests itself distinctly in specific human individuals or collectivities, and is thus inexorably situated and partial. That is the first problem: the affect of hatred must always be borne by some human being. It cannot therefore be consistently both a) contempt for that which is inferior to oneself, and b) universal in scope, since a human being, included in its own hatred of all things human, cannot be inferior to itself.

The misanthropist must choose between two paths. The first is to make an exception for some special class of human being, and to include oneself in the exception. A few human beings are strong, pure, decent and worthy of survival. Even though the very essence of humanity is accursed, it is possible to live an aesthetically pleasing life. The conditions of such a life will include isolation from the "great masses" of humanity (concentrated as they are in the cities), emotional coldness and repression, and devotion to an external rule that will give coherence and meaning to one’s actions. Thus, mutatis mutandis, Lovecraft’s approbation for "Puritan inhibitions" as "attempts to make of life a work of art &mdash; to fashion a pattern of beauty in the hog-wallow that is animal existence", and the post-apocalyptic rural paganism dreamed of by Varg Vikernes.

The first path alternates with the second, according to which all of humanity remains accursed but is hated from the standpoint of the inhuman &mdash; in the first instance, of the dead. "Pure Depressive Black Funeral Doom Metal" exponent Nortt describes his music thus:

> The elegies of Nortt tell about death and darkness viewed from the dying and from the dead. They reveal a bitter hate towards life and its divine maker. It is pure misanthropy and blasphemy &mdash; not self-pity! The darkened soil is praised as the godforsaken heaven &mdash; a heaven in hell. In order to unchain oneself from the despair of life, follow the path of death! At a funereal pace and with a sombre, chanting voice, Nortt summons the forces in the night.

"Pure misanthropy...not self-pity": in order to be pure, misanthropy must be purified of any attachment to the human self that would fall within its remit. A world of the dead that despises and rejects that of the living: such is the allegiance of the misanthropist without reserve. Xasthur’s Telepathic with the Deceased engages the same conceit: "Haters of life are telepathic with the deceased. / Fragments of failure, some said it was art, for it only bears a meaning when all life is torn apart". Tele-antipathy, the "spooky action at a distance" of "the dying and…the dead": it is unsurprising that a recurring theme in Xasthur’s lyrics and song titles is that of projection. Total misanthropy forces a split in the human self, a self-projection into the realm of the inhuman &mdash; or is it a projection from that realm into the human world?

Mirrors for Xasthur have a double significance, both as portals to the land of the dead and as multipliers of appearances holding the living captive: they establish a geometry of reflections which is both the prison of reality and the transcendental "screen" beyond which lies a universe of discord and unthinkable chaos. Is the horror which looks back at you from the mirror a projection from the malevolent beyond, or the simple truth of your all-too-human existence? The answer must be "both": the image captured by the mirror is both veridical reflection and projection from/into the land of the dead, detached from any possible referent in the world of the living.

What has this second misanthropy of pure inhumanity and existential horror to do with the first misanthropy, that of the racial-purist elite detaching itself from the degraded and "animal" life of the mass of humanity and forcing an aesthetically good existence by sheer effort of revulsion? For the two surely coincide, and even reinforce each other, in both Lovecraft’s fiction and the sepulchral world of black metal. The answer has to do with the generic, and will be examined in the next post.

## Generic Misanthropy (ii)

_(February 9th, 2007)_

It is unusual for the racist to loathe other races for their own sake: the mere existence of human beings he considers inferior does not in itself constitute an affront. In a properly ordered society the lawful separation of human types (this notion discriminating between both races and classes) permits a peaceful co-existence, perhaps even a relationship of benevolent condescension (programs of moral education, sterilisation etc).

What concerns the racist is everything that undermines this proper separation and balance of populations: the "demographic" menace of "unconstrained" growth in a minority population, the mixing of types through the relaxation of social boundaries and &mdash; abomination of abominations &mdash; "miscegenation".

Lovecraft’s admirer Robert Bloch abominates jazz in much the same terms as Sayyid Qutb: it is the music of degenerates, "created by Negroes to satisfy their love of noise and to whet their sexual desires". Varg Vikernes says the same of rock music: its white proponents want to be black, and mimic the depraved and senseless antics of "the negro".

Racial purism is thus immediately cultural purism, driven by a revulsion at  "popular" forms which are seen as emanating from the worst elements of an already illicit and chaotic admixture of populations. White people who want to be black, what monsters! Qutb’s commination of infidel society is a teratology; everyhere the lawful scheme established for human flourishing is transgressed, everywhere there are chimerae, Things that Should Not Be.

Racist misanthropy is the hatred of generic humanity, of everything in humanity which tends towards indistinction: the sloughing off of predicates or the production of unclassifiable hybrids. It is thus, in spite of its apparent favouritism and special pleading on behalf of the "master" race, a hatred of humanity itself, not as a totality produced by adding all the races together but as the untotalisable excess of any scheme of ethnic classification.

Here we find the means to distinguish between two modernisms. The first, which is avant-gardist, seeks a new body beyond the law and assembles its cadre according to a novel and enigmatic chording of affinities. The second, which is aristocratic and reactionary, wishes to "affirm the hierarchies", to maintain (or recover from obscurity) an eternal principle of separation between the values of the elite and those of the levelling, democratic "mass" culture.

For Houellebecq’s Lovecraft, however, this principle of separation forms the dividing line between the torturer and the victim: regnant chaos snuffs out the man of truth whose investigations draw him into its flame. Racist terror/teratology, combined with masochism, produces the fantastic dominion of Cthulhu and Azathoth "the monstrous nuclear chaos beyond angled space". It is this masochistic projection that enables the passage from embodied and racialised loathing to existential horror and total &mdash; that is, generic or predicate-less &mdash; misanthropy.

## An Evil Cradling

_(February 28th, 2007)_

_K-Punk_ asks a pertinent question about Xasthur’s "ambient" qualities:

> But then again, Xasthur are curiously calming, too, if you play them at an ambient volume. (The lack of tension-release, the swampy viscosity, make Xasthur excellent background music, really good to work to.) Which poses the question: how much of Xasthur’s nihilism comes from the sound, and how much from the words - or more precisely (since the lyrics are all but inaudible), the titles?

I’ve been drifting in and out of sleep with Xasthur on the headphones on the train to and from work for the past few days; it’s probably just as well that subliminal programming doesn’t really work, or my unconscious would undoubtedly be in a bad way by now. All the same, I don’t think that it’s only the titles that index Xasthur’s nihilism: that "swampy viscosity" of sonic texture envelops a decidedly warped tonal language, quite at odds with the unthreatening diatonicity that much "ambient" music seems to have inherited from the minimalism of Steve Reich and Terry Riley.

A typical passage will feature separate guitar parts, panned to the far left and far right, playing in unison or consonantly in harmony but occasionally veering off in different directions so as to producing jarring collisions - these seem accidental at first, but are ratified by repetition so that the "wrongness" becomes structural, like the eldritch geometry of Lovecraft’s ancient architecture. One part will shift up a semitone, leaving the other anchored where it was but now drastically out of key, before returning to its original root. The resulting discords are not so much the "outside notes" of jazz as the "simultaneous false relations" of early Renaissance composers such as Carlo Gesualdo: deliberate tonal contradictions introduced into an otherwise conventional tonal system (most of Xasthur’s themes are in the harmonic minor scale) for expressive effect.

The harmonic weirdness produces textural effects, too. Trad metal relies heavily on the "power chord", in which the harmonics produced by the root and fifth note resonate together to produce a particularly satisfying, deep, coherent timbre; it sounds especially good when overdriven. Xasthur’s guitar fuzz goes out of its way to avoid sounding "good" in this way, introducing minor intervals (tritones, minor thirds and semitones) wherever possible to produce a much more complex and unsettled harmonic structure. The queasy, pervasive out-of-tuneness produced by the use of a wide chorus effect (also noticeable in the synth parts) plays a further role in disrupting metal’s traditional pull towards the harmonically convergent.

I don’t think it’s any exaggeration to say that Malefic’s nihilism forms a consistent aesthetic philosophy, directly expressed in the compositional techniques used in Xasthur’s music. If Xasthur’s music is "ambient", its ambience is that of the accursed or poisoned womb: the "No-exit despair" phase of Stanislav Grof’s _Basic Perinatal Matrix II_, glossed here in terms any follower of Black metal would find immediately familiar:

> In Grof’s schema, BPM I is followed by BPM II (i.e., Basic Perinatal Matrix II), which are experiences and feelings related to the time of "no exit" in the womb and claustrophobic-like feelings occurring to nearly all humans in the late stages of pregnancy and especially with the onset of labor, when the cervix is not yet dilated. Since there does not seem to be any "light at the end of the tunnel" – metaphorically speaking – it is characterized by feelings of depression, guilt, despair, and blame, and a characterization of oneself as being in the position of "the victim." It is very much like deMause’s period of collective feelings of entrapment, strangulation, suffocation, and poisonous placenta, which he has found to precede the actual outbreak of war or other violence.
